---
layout: page-fullwidth
title: "LM Tutorial"
subheadline: ""
show_meta: false
teaser: ""
permalink: "/lmtut/"
sidebar: "left"
header: no
---

# POSCAR to QSGW 

To perform a basic QSGW calculation and set up for more accurate/specific calculations starting from a POSCAR file the following steps can be used as a basic tutorial and guide. In particular cases certain steps may be amended or ommitted. 

### _Step 1: Crystal structure_  

The first step is to extract the site/crystall structure from the POSCAR file. This can be achieved in two methods using ”*poscar2init*{: style="color: green"}” or ”*poscar2site*{: style="color: green"}”, both write output as *stdout*{: style="color: blue"} while ”*poscar2site*{: style="color: green"}” also creates a file named ”*site*{: style="color: green"}”. To use just execute in the directory with the POSCAR file. The output of the two executables are very similar, ”Site” file is more convenient when the *ctrl.ext*{: style="color: blue"} file has been prepared and only the ”*site.ext*{: style="color: green"}” is needed, while *init.ext*{: style="color: green"} can be used to create a simple template input file (hence recommended for 1st runs).

<div onclick="elm = document.getElementById('box1'); if(elm.style.display == 'none') elm.style.display = 'block'; else elm.style.display = 'none';">Click here to show or hide.</div>
{::nomarkdown}<div style="display:none;" id="box1">{:/}

To create ”*init.ext*{: style="color: green"}” invoke the following command in the directory containing the POSCAR,

	$poscar2init > init.ext

(ext should be replaced by an appropriate extension for the material e.g Si for silicon,CdTe for Cadmium telluride).  

{::nomarkdown}</div>{:/}

### _Step 2: Initial control file_  

With the crystal structure at hand the lm package is capable of creating a basic control file for you, simply use the command

	$blm −−gw --addes --wsitex init.ext

which will create *actrl.ext*{: style="color: green"} which is almost ready for DFT calculations, the ”a” in ”*actrl.ext*{: style="color: green"}” is there so existing *ctrl.ext*{: style="color: green"} files are not over written. The *−−gw*{: style="color: blue"} switch produces an *init.ext*{: style="color: green"} file more suited for GW calculation, *−−addes*{: style="color: blue"} adapts the input file to include empty spheres and *--wsitex*{: style="color: blue"} writes a site file in terms of fractional coordiantes. The file is set-up with very basic tokens/switches and the rest are set as their default values, of course more can be specified manually in the *ctrl.ext*{: style="color: green"} file. The list of input switches are available [here](https://lordcephei.github.io/inputguide/); You can also use ”*−−input*{: style="color: blue"}”

	$ lmf −−input

to print out a full list of all available input options.

### _Step 3: DFT set up_  

To run GW calculation you must first get a self consistent DFT calculation, here are the basic steps needed for the full-potential(FP) approach (this is more versatile than atomic sphere approximation (ASA) but also slower). Start by coping *actrl.ext*{: style="color: green"} to *ctrl.ext*{: style="color: green"}:

	$cp actrl.ext ctrl.ext

This is the file that lm packages access as iput file. For FP calculations it is often nessery to add empty spheres to act as floating orbital centers, for this the following line in the *ctrl.ext*{: style="color: green"} has to be uncommented

     #SCLWSR=21 WSRMAX=3.3
 
The empty spheres can be automatically generated by envoking

    $lmchk ctrl.ext --findes --nescut=12 --wsitex

using *--addes*{: style="color: blue"} generates empty spheres to maximally fill the cell volume within given overlap constraints, the number of empty spheres are limited to 12 through *--nescut=12*{: style="color: blue"}. To include the empty spheres information in future calculations comment all instances of "SITE FILE=site" and uncomment  all instances "SITE=essite" in the *ctrl.ext*{: style="color: green"}, next add the SPEC information for the empty spheres found in *poses.ext*{: style="color: green"}.
Before starting with FP the atomistic densities and the basis are need, these parameters can be obtained by:

	$lmfa ctrl.ext -vles=11

<div onclick="elm = document.getElementById('box3'); if(elm.style.display == 'none') elm.style.display = 'block'; else elm.style.display = 'none';">Click here to show or hide.</div>
{::nomarkdown}<div style="display:none;" id="box3">{:/}

There are two important result to take note of at this stage; The first is the GMAX written at the end of the stdout, the other is the *basp0.ext*{: style="color: green"} file which contains the basis parameters (the ”0” is there not to over write previous *basp.ext*{: style="color: green"} files, note that the basis set can be set in the ctrl file as well). To perform a DFT-FP calculation add the GMAX from stdout to the HAM_GMAX in the *ctrl.ext*{: style="color: green"} file and move *basp0.ext*{: style="color: green"} to *basp.ext*{: style="color: green"}. Some times it is necessary to repeat this step once to avoid crashes in the future.

{::nomarkdown}</div>{:/}

### _Step 4: DFT_  

Before running a DFT calculation certain parameters have to be set in the *ctrl.ext*{: style="color: green"}, for FP calculations les variable should be set to 11 as shown previously.
Once all the essential parameters have been set you can run a full-potential DFT  calculation by executing:

	$ lmf ctrl.ext

<div onclick="elm = document.getElementById('box3'); if(elm.style.display == 'none') elm.style.display = 'block'; else elm.style.display = 'none';">Click here to show or hide.</div>
{::nomarkdown}<div style="display:none;" id="box3">{:/}

This may give you an error regarding the k-mesh settings. The k-mesh division NKABC has been set to zero which is not valid, to proceed change the value in *ctrl.ext*{: style="color: green"} file (under BZ_NKABC) or execute

	$ lmf ctrl.ext -vnk=4

This will set NKABC as 4x4x4.This should be enough for a self consistent calculation, you may also have to set a value for the number of iteration in *ITER NIT*{: style="color: blue"} or *-vnit=*{: style="color: blue"} in command line. Other parameters which are important even for a basic preliminary DFT calculation may include things such as spin polarization and spin orbit coupling; While you may find other parameters become key for certain materials.

{::nomarkdown}</div>{:/}

If self-consistency was not achieved repeat the calculation with higher number of iterations.

### _Step 5: GW set up(almost there)_  

Once self consistency has been achieved with the desired parameters within DFT, you can start a qsGW calculation. First you have to create an input files for the GW package, once again the lmto package has the capability to make tempelate *GWinput*{: style="color: green"} which can be utulised through

	$ echo -1 | lmfgwd ctrl.ext 

alternatively invoke

	$ lmfgwd ctrl.ext

to see all options available through *lmfgwd*{: style="color: blue"}. This should create a number of files one of which is *GWinput*{: style="color: green"}; this serves as the input file for all GW based calculations. Variables are documented within the file, further information can be found in the Darsbury lecture power points and documentation folder of the lm package.

### _Step 6: Sanity check_  


To check that the GW files created are sutiable and sufficient for a qsgw calculation simply run:

	$ echo -2 | lmfgwd ctrl.ext

with this method common errors during GW runs are minimized.

### _Step 7: qsGW (and we are done)_  

To run qsGW calculation the following command is invoked

	$lmgwsc --wt --openmp=12 --code2 --sym -maxit=10 --insul=25 --getsigp --tol=2e-5 --start=sig ext

The definition of all the switches above can be found through

    	$lmgwsc --h

It is often a good  idea to run a 1-shot GW calculation (setting -maxit=0) and plotting band structure so that basis and other parameters can be altered if needed.

once self-consistency has been achieved the file ”*sigm.ext*{: style="color: green"}”  contains the information regarding the self energy (Σ from Hedin’s equations). Running a FP calculation with ”*sigm.ext*{: style="color: green"}” present in the same directory  will now include the electronic self energy obtained from qsGW. Using the lmf with *sigm.ext*{: style="color: green"} allows for qsGW level calculations of Band structure, optics, DOS ....... with much faster speed as the lmf uses the single particle approximation.

### _Bonus Step_  

#### Band structure  

<div onclick="elm = document.getElementById('box4'); if(elm.style.display == 'none') elm.style.display = 'block'; else elm.style.display = 'none';">Click here to show or hide.</div>
{::nomarkdown}<div style="display:none;" id="box4">{:/}

Creating the band structure is fairly simple. All you have to do is create a file which specifies which branches you want and how fine a mesh you want it for. So create a file called *syml.ext*{: style="color: green"}; the syntax for this file is quite intuitive, each line provides information for each band structure branch to be outputted; Simply specify the number of points in the branch, starting vector and final vector; for example branch Γ to R with 50 k points will be :

	50 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 0.5

there are sample syml file in the ASAsampples folder. once you have your syml.ext file simply run

	$ lmf ctrl.ext −−band:fn=syml −−rs=1,0

The switch *−−band:fn=syml*{: style="color: blue"} specifies a band structure calculation with the appropriate data, the second switch *−−rs=1,0*{: style="color: green"} tells the program to read from the *rst.ext*{: style="color: green"} file (1st digit is 1) and not to write to the *rst.ext*{: style="color: green"} file (2nd digit is 0), this is recommended so you always use the same self-consistent density with out altering each run.

{::nomarkdown}</div>{:/}

#### Optics  

Calculating optical properties are slightly dependant on a number of switches used for your calculation.

##### Procedure A  

<div onclick="elm = document.getElementById('box5'); if(elm.style.display == 'none') elm.style.display = 'block'; else elm.style.display = 'none';">Click here to show or hide.</div>
{::nomarkdown}<div style="display:none;" id="box5">{:/}

First I will discuss for the case of where number of spins (*-vnsp=1*{: style="color: blue"}) or spin orbit coupling is taken into about through ”L·S” (i.e. *-vnsp=2*{: style="color: blue"} and *-vso=1*{: style="color: blue"}). The simplest procedure will be to set *OPTICS MODE=1*{: style="color: blue"} and set energy window and mesh density through *OPTICS WINDOW=a b*{: style="color: blue"} and *OPTICS=NPTS*{: style="color: blue"} respectively, note a and b are in units Rydberg. Now run the program again Cartesian

	$ lmf ctrl.ext −−rs=1,0

this will create a file called *opt.ext*{: style="color: green"} which is the imaginary part of the dielectric function. the format of the file is:

	Energy εix εiy εiz

where x y and z are the real space directions.

{::nomarkdown}</div>{:/}

##### Procedure B  

For the case where *-vso=3*{: style="color: blue"} the procedure has to be preformed through two steps. Once with *OPTICS MODE=1*{: style="color: blue"} and once with *OPTICS MODE=2*{: style="color: blue"}, in this mode the *opt.ext*{: style="color: green"} files are spin polarized.

##### Joint Density of States  

JDOS is calculated in the same manor as εi but with *OPTICS MODE=-1*{: style="color: blue"} for the case of *-vnsp=1*{: style="color: blue"} or *-vnsp=2*{: style="color: blue"} and *-vso=1*{: style="color: blue"}, and with *OPTICS MODE=-1*{: style="color: blue"} and *OPTICS MODE=-2*{: style="color: blue"} for case *-vnsp=2*{: style="color: blue"} and *-vso=3*{: style="color: blue"}.

##### Other procedures  

There are currently 13 optics mode, a brief description of each is given through:

	$ lmf −−input

Optics mode 8 (non-equilibrium absorption) and 9 (non-equilibrium emission) will be documented separately.

{::nomarkdown}</div>{:/}
